











































Cognitive Linguistics


Book Review

Rochelle Lieber. English Nouns: The Ecology of Nominalization. Cambridge
Studies in Linguistics 150. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016, 197
pp. ISBN 978-1-107-16137-5. Hardback and E-book 49.99 USD.

Reviewed by Chongwon Park, Department of English, Linguistics, and Writing Studies,
University of Minnesota, Duluth, USA, E-mail: cpark2@d.umn.edu

https://doi.org/10.1515/cog-2017-0077

This monograph is another important contribution by Rochelle Lieber, whose
main interest for several decades has been English morphology. Lieber right-
fully argues that the relationship between form and meaning in the nominali-
zation process is never one-to-one. Rather, it forms a complicated network. She
further demonstrates how this polysemous relationship can be captured in the
modified Lexical Semantic Framework (LSF), which was mainly developed in
Lieber (2004) from a formal linguistics perspective. Lieber’s analyses and
arguments are based on naturally occurring data extracted from the Corpus
of Contemporary American English (Davies 2008). In presenting her argu-
ments, she uses the derivational ecosystem metaphor. In this metaphor, mor-
phological types (specific affixes and conversion) are analogous to organisms,
while readings (agent, location, etc.) are analogous to habitats. Here, Lieber
emphasizes that complex forms are construed depending on the context as
opposed to having fixed semantic content. While rigid semantic content is
termed meaning, Lieber uses the term reading to refer to a context-dependent
meaning.

According to Lieber, some habitats will have several morphological types
that inhabit them, whereas other habitats are largely uninhabited. In the latter
case, morphological types can expand their territories by deploying themselves
to cover those underexploited semantic habitats. One example Lieber identifies
for this particular case is the derivation of inanimate patient nouns. She
observes that English does not have a primary morphological type that inhabits
the inanimate patient semantic habitat. This previously unpopulated habitat is
becoming inhabited by nominalizations derived with -ing, -er, conversion, and
ATK (an acronym for -ation and kin) nominalizations, as exemplified by washing,
loaner (as in If I don’t get a new computer soon, I hope I can get a loaner), melt (as
in Before making the cake pops, I bought several colors of candy melts), and
concoction. She also suggests that the -ables affix, as in collectables, is in the
process of evolution toward an organism that would eventually inhabit the

Cognitive Linguistics 2017; aop

Authenticated | cpark2@d.umn.edu author's copy
Download Date | 10/16/17 2:27 AM



inanimate patient noun habitat. This particular affix, however, is evolving with a
specific modal nuance. I find this example intriguing, and will come back to it
later in my review.

This book is soundly written; the logical flow is natural, and the technical
LSF analyses are well explained and easy to follow. The book is composed of
three parts. Part I, which contains two chapters, provides necessary justifica-
tions for the research as well as the terminology and methodology adopted in
this book. Chapter 1 identifies the overall goal of this monograph. Though much
research has discussed Event/Result (E/R) and personal nominalizations, con-
spicuously less attention has been paid to the full range of nominalizations. In
Lieber’s words, “[n]either morphologists nor syntacticians have studied the full
range of data pertaining to nominalizations or the intricacies of polysemy that
nominalizations display” (p. 5). This, however, is the task Lieber has set herself:
to include E/R and personal nominalizations, collective and abstract nominali-
zations, and a few seldom-discussed nominalizations in her analyses. This book
undoubtedly achieves the goal by presenting some of the most thorough
research on the full range of English nominalization. Chapter 2 sets out the
terminology Lieber uses and discusses the sources for data. This is an important
step because different people use different terms in dealing with nominaliza-
tions, which oftentimes causes confusion. In this chapter, Lieber defines opposi-
tions, such as simplex vs. complex nouns, eventive vs. non-eventive readings,
active vs. passive configurations, and argumental vs. non-argumental com-
pounds, among other terms.

Part II, which consists of two chapters, is devoted to the discussion of
previous claims and the current data. In Chapter 3, Lieber raises nineteen
questions gathered from discussions in the extant research. These questions
not only pertain to E/R and ATK nominalizations, but also to conversion and
simplex nouns. Lieber demonstrates that the putative answers for the vast
majority of these questions need to be reconsidered when we examine the
data extracted from COCA (the Corpus of Contemporary American English). In
sum, she argues that nominalizations are much more malleable than previous
researchers have claimed. Chapter 4 starts out by providing readings of affixes
with relevant examples. Throughout this process, Lieber states that we almost
never find one-to-one relationships between affixes and readings. Her deriva-
tional ecosystem metaphor is best depicted in Figure 1, redrawn after Lieber’s
Figure 4.1 (p. 73). In this figure, each semantic habitat contains multiple mor-
phological types, and one morphological type can occupy multiple semantic
habitats. Morphological types rendered in regular font express the identified
semantic habitats primarily, whereas the lighter font depicts morphological
types that express the relevant habitat secondarily.

2 Book Review

Authenticated | cpark2@d.umn.edu author's copy
Download Date | 10/16/17 2:27 AM



Part III provides analyses of nominalizations in LSF. Chapter 5 lays out the basic
concepts and notations of LSF necessary for the analysis of nominalizations. In
addition to the seven semantic features provided in Lieber (2009), such as [+/–
material] for concrete or abstract nouns and [+/– dynamic] for event or state
readings, she adds one more feature critical to the analysis of nominalization:
[+/– animate]. Based on her earlier work, she also introduces Principle of
Coindexation (PC) and Principle of Feature Value Matching (PFVM). What PC
does is to coindex the highest non-head argument with the highest head argu-
ment. For example, in the nominal, the neighbor’s construction of the garage, the

Figure 1: Habitats and Their Occupants.

Book Review 3

Authenticated | cpark2@d.umn.edu author's copy
Download Date | 10/16/17 2:27 AM



head noun construction’s highest argument is marked < sentient > , and the sen-
tient argument neighbor is coindexed with it, thereby leading to the subject-like
reading of neighbor’s. PFVM is needed to copy the feature of the base in the
derived nominal. For example, the feature [ + dynamic] of the base verb con-
struct needs to be copied to the nominalized form construction in The construc-
tion took place last summer. By contrast, His preoccupation took place last
summer is not acceptable, because the base verb preoccupy is marked [–
dynamic], and the negative value is copied to the nominalized form. With the
technical preliminaries laid out in Chapter 5, the analysis of the event reading of
E/R nominalizers naturally follows in Chapter 6. Lieber demonstrates how PC
can be utilized in analyzing AKT/-ing nominalizations and conversion nouns.
Remarkably, she demonstrates that the -ing nominalizations exhibit precisely
the same pattern of behavior as ATK nominalizations.

Then, Lieber moves on to Chapter 7, which deals with various referential
readings nominalizations can convey. I find this chapter the most interesting in
this monograph. This chapter provides in-depth analyses of the referential read-
ings for ATK, -ing, conversion, personal, abstract, collective, and inanimate
patient nominals. Lieber argues that the various readings of these nominals
arise through the interplay between the skeletal configurations and the two
aforementioned principles. It is worth noting that she introduces another impor-
tant concept, contextual coercion, which is needed to determine some of the
feature values within the larger context in which the nominalization occurs. In
the example The Guggenheim, …, provided President Fraga with an example of a
successful construction that helped to remake a city’s image, contextual coercion
allows us to infer that construction is a concrete entity, leading to the assignment
of the positive value to the [material] feature. Likewise, in analyzing the -er affix,
Lieber assumes that the referential argument of the affix is underspecified for
the [animate] feature, and the positive or negative value is assigned drawn from
the general context through contextual coercion.

Chapter 8, which is somewhat independent of the other chapters and largely
overlapping with Lieber (2016), focuses on compounding. Similar to Chapter 3,
Lieber starts out by summarizing the claims made by previous researchers, and
then she debunks the claims based on the data extracted from COCA. Non-
argumental compounds – attributive (such as atomic bomb) and coordinative
(such as teacher-scholar) – are straightforwardly accounted for in LSF because
both the first and the second elements have only one referential argument;
however, encyclopedic information plays an important role in determining the
readings. By contrast, argumental compounds – synthetic (such as truck driver)
and non-affixal (de)verbal (such as attack dog) compounds – require more
complicated indexation mechanisms but are less dependent on contextual and

4 Book Review

Authenticated | cpark2@d.umn.edu author's copy
Download Date | 10/16/17 2:27 AM



encyclopedic information. Overall, this chapter observes new types of data
hitherto unrecognized.

The last chapter, Chapter 9, concludes this book by repeating the deriva-
tional ecosystem: “I believe that studying complex nouns in their natural habi-
tats – nouns in the wild, as it were – leads us to understand the workings of
derived nouns in a much deeper way” (p. 185). Here, the natural habitat of
course refers to large corpora.

There is no denying that this book makes significant contributions both
empirically and theoretically. Be that as it may, I believe there are several
weaknesses. First, Lieber emphatically states that one nominalizing affix has
multiple readings, which are intricately connected with each other through
polysemous relationships. In fact, this is one of her main theses in this book.
Although this type of polysemy network has rarely drawn full attention within
the formal linguistics camp, there is a long tradition that deals with polysemous
word and affixal meanings in the cognitive linguistics enterprise. Due to space
limitations, I will not introduce a comprehensive list of the relevant research,
but some of the previous studies exclusively focus on nominalizing affixes like
-er. They include Heyvaert (2003), Panther and Thornburg (2002), and Ryder
(1999), among many others. It is unfortunate that these researchers’ work has
not been incorporated into this monograph. Lieber clearly points out that the
lack of communication between syntacticians and morphologists is a hurdle for
the advancement of our understanding of nominalizations (p. 6). Nevertheless,
she seems to ignore the majority of the work achieved outside of the formal
linguistics tradition, which I believe is somewhat ironic, considering her criti-
cism on the lack of communication among linguists.

Second, Lieber states, “I look at this problem [how meaning happens] from
the perspective of a generative morphologist, one who believes that only a
carefully crafted formal system can yield precise predictions that can be tested
against linguistic data” (p. 180). I have no issues with carefully crafted formal
systems, and I strongly believe formal systems have their own values. However,
formal systems have many limitations, and we can certainly make precise
predictions without the help of formal apparatus. Consider Lieber’s claim that
some semantic features are validated through contextual coercion, which
requires understanding of the larger speech context. Although she relies on
contextual coercion when dealing with referential readings, she does not pro-
vide any formal mechanism for that process, let alone a carefully crafted version.
Nevertheless, contextual coercion becomes crucial in deriving desirable readings
and making correct predictions in her analysis. I wish Lieber had delved into the
nature of contextual coercion more deeply, because in the current definition, it
is overly vague and open to many interpretations.

Book Review 5

Authenticated | cpark2@d.umn.edu author's copy
Download Date | 10/16/17 2:27 AM



The third weakness concerns the rise of polysemous meanings. For example,
in analyzing the -er affix, Lieber relies on four components: skeletal configura-
tions of the affix and the base, PC, PFVM, and (potentially) Principle of Coercion.
These components collaborate to create various readings of -er nominals. Since
-er nominals can be used for non-agentive entities like loaner discussed above,
she underspecifies the [animate] feature for the referential argument of -er. This
is a somewhat unsatisfactory resolution because -er historically originated from
agentivity (Heyvaert 2003) and the vast majority of -er nominals still represent
agentivity. For this reason, I believe her underspecification approach is moti-
vated more by a theoretical convenience than based on empirical grounds. As
for the rise of the polysemous meanings, I believe there are many examples that
cannot be easily explained by the interplay of the four aforementioned compo-
nents. Consider the oft-discussed example, cliffhanger, which means ‘suspense-
ful event’. Panther and Thornburg (2002) provide one of the most elaborated
analyses of English -er nominals based on metaphoric and metonymic shifts.
According to them, the source concept HUMAN (EXPERIENCER) PARTICIPANT
undergoes metonymic shift to the target concept EVENT, thereby leading to the
reading ‘event that the human participant is crucially involved in.’ In addition,
the base cliffhang is also elaborated metonymically by the CAUSE FOR EFFECT
metonymy: from activity (cliffhanging) to effect of activity (suspense). In other
words, new polysemous meanings arise due to metonymic and metaphoric shifts
that operate both on the base and the affix. In this approach, we can also
identify the fully specified primary meaning of the -er affix. I believe Panther
and Thornburg’s metaphor/metonymy-based approach to English nominals will
answer many unanswered questions in Lieber’s LSF-based analysis. Perhaps, a
similar type of analysis might be extended to the -ables affix, which derives
inanimate patient nouns.

Fourth, some technical LSF analyses need more attention. For example, the
[dynamic] feature for the -ing affix is underspecified. This is so because the
polarity value needs to be copied from that of the base. The noun dwelling
inherits the negative value for [dynamic] from the stative base dwell. This copy
mechanism cannot explain many examples such as droppings as in bird’s drop-
pings, because the base drop is marked [ + dynamic], but the noun droppings
needs to be marked [– dynamic]. Another technical challenge is observed when
dealing with the -ables affix. To incorporate the modal nuance of the affix,
Lieber introduces the modal operator symbol used in modal logic without
further discussion on how this modal nuance arises. Once again, I believe this
is more likely a technical convenience rather than an explanation or an analysis.
Consequently, while the discussion is based on an interesting and astute obser-
vation, the analysis suffers from a lack of detail.

6 Book Review

Authenticated | cpark2@d.umn.edu author's copy
Download Date | 10/16/17 2:27 AM



Finally, Lieber completely ignores two other types of nominalizations known
as POSS-ing and ACC-ing as in his destroying the sandcastle and him destroying the
sandcastle, respectively. I understand that she focuses on lexical nominaliza-
tions, which are more morphologically oriented than the gerundive nominaliza-
tions. However, both POSS-ing and ACC-ing nominalizations need to reflect the
base verb’s argument structures one way or another. Since LSF is also highly
reflective of the base’s argument and skeletal configurations, asking for a dis-
cussion on these nominalizations does not seem to be too far-fetched.

Overall, this book will be of interest to those working in the field of English
nominalization. It also has a great potential for people who are working on
languages typologically different from English to see how LSF can be adopted in
the analysis of those languages. There is undoubtedly great merit in trying to
develop an inclusive theory that accounts for a full range of nominalizations, as
Lieber does in this book. That said, I believe incorporating the findings discov-
ered in cognitive linguistics would make the research on nominalizations much
more interesting and fruitful. It is unfortunate that the neglect of relevant
cognitive linguistics research makes the book a less satisfying read than it
would have been otherwise.

References

Davies, Mark. 2008. Corpus of Contemporary American English. http://corpus.byu.edu/coca.
Heyvaert, Liesbet. 2003. A cognitive-functional approach to nominalization in English. Berlin &

New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lieber, Rochelle. 2004. Morphology and lexical semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press.
Lieber, Rochelle. 2009. A lexical semantic approach to compounding. In Rochelle Lieber & Pavol

S ̌Tekauer (eds.), The Oxford handbook of compounding, 78–104. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Lieber, Rochelle. 2016. The lexical semantic approach to compounding. In Pius Ten Hacken
(ed.), The semantics of compounding, 38–53. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Panther, Klaus-Uwe & Linda L. Thornburg. 2002. The roles of metaphor and metonymy in
English -er nominals. In René Dirven & Ralf Pörings (eds.), Metaphor and metonymy in
comparison and contrast, 279–319. Berlin & New York: Mouton de Gruyter.

Ryder, Mary E. 1999. Bankers and blue-chippers: An account of -er formations in present-day
English. English Language and Linguistics 3(2),269–297.

Book Review 7

Authenticated | cpark2@d.umn.edu author's copy
Download Date | 10/16/17 2:27 AM

http://corpus.byu.edu/coca

